---
layout: papers
categories: papers
title: Functions-as-Constructors Higher-Order Unification
year: 2016
venue: "1st International Conference on Formal Structures for
Computation and Deduction, FSCD 2016"
city: Porto, Portugal
people: Tomer Libal, Dale Miller
draft: fcu-conference.pdf
---
Unification is a central operation in the construction of a range of computational logic systems
based on first-order and higher-order logics. First-order unification has a number of properties
that dominates the way it is incorporated within such systems. In particular, first-order unifi-
cation is decidable, unary, and can be performed on untyped term structures. None of these
three properties hold for full higher-order unification: unification is undecidable, unifiers can be
incomparable, and term-level typing can dominate the search for unifiers. The so-called pattern
subset of higher-order unification was designed to be a small extension to first-order unification
that respected the basic laws governing λ-binding (the equalities of α, β, and η-conversion) but
which also satisfied those three properties. While the pattern fragment of higher-order unification
has been popular in various implemented systems and in various theoretical considerations, it is
too weak for a number of applications. In this paper, we define an extension of pattern unifica-
tion that is motivated by some existing applications and which satisfies these three properties.
The main idea behind this extension is that the arguments to a higher-order, free variable can
be more than just distinct bound variables: they can also be terms constructed from (sufficient
numbers of) such variables using term constructors and where no argument is a subterm of any
other argument. We show that this extension to pattern unification satisfies the three properties
mentioned above.
