---
layout: papers
categories: papers
title: Functions-as-constructors Higher-order Unification, Extended Pattern Unification
year: 2021
venue: Annals of Mathematics and Artificial Intelligence
people: Tomer Libal, Dale Miller
original: https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1007/s10472-021-09774-y.pdf
---
Unification is a central operation in constructing a range of compu-
tational logic systems based on first-order and higher-order logics. First-order
unification has several properties that guide its incorporation in such systems.
In particular, first-order unification is decidable, unary, and can be performed
on untyped term structures. None of these three properties hold for full higher-
order unification: unification is undecidable, unifiers can be incomparable, and
term-level typing can dominate the search for unifiers. The so-called pattern
subset of higher-order unification was designed to be a small extension to first-
order unification that respects the laws governing lambda-binding (i.e., the equali-
ties for alpha, beta, and eta-conversion) but which also satisfied those three properties.
While the pattern fragment of higher-order unification has been used in nu-
merous implemented systems and in various theoretical settings, it is too weak
for many applications. This paper defines an extension of pattern unification
that should make it more generally applicable, especially in proof assistants
that allow for higher-order functions. This extension's main idea is that the ar-
guments to a higher-order, free variable can be more than just distinct bound
variables. In particular, such arguments can be terms constructed from (suffi-
cient numbers of) such bound variables using term constructors and where no
argument is a subterm of any other argument. We show that this extension to
pattern unification satisfies the three properties mentioned above.
